## Motivation  

**FIGURE 1: Map of Seismic Stations and Event distribution within 10 km**

The United States Geological Survey (USGS) identified Mount Baker (48.7745°N, -121.8172°E) as a high threat potential volcano (Ewert et al., 2018), motivating its continuous seismic monitoring since 1972 by the Pacific Northwest Seismic Network (PNSN) and the USGS Cascade Volcano Observatory (CVO). However, Mt. Baker is also under-monitored, with just one permanent seismic station (UW.MBW) within 30 km of the edifice for much of it's instrumented record. Local monitoring has improved in the past 15 years with permanent station additions in 2009 (UW.SHUK), 2019 (UW.PUBD, UW.PLBD), 2021 (UW.SAXON; UW.MULN; UW.DMNG), and 2023 (UW.MBW2) (Figs. 1-2). Temporary seismic deployments on Mt. Baker in 1975-1977 (Malone, 1977; Weaver & Malone, 1979) and 2008-2009 (Caplan-Auerbach et al., 2009) provided addition insights into the variety and phenomological source of seismicity emminating from Mt. Baker (Fig. 1, orange labeled stations). 

The PNSN catalog for Mt. Baker - defined here as events within 10 km of the summit (Fig. 1) - indicates that relatively few volcano-tectonic earthquakes occur at Mt. Baker, even during its period of unrest in 1975-1976 (Malone, 1977; review in Crider et al., 2011) (Fig. 2). In contrast, a substantial number of low frequency (LF) seismic events emminate from the mountain (Fig. 2). Those LF's accurately located at depth are thought to arise from fluid migration beneath the volcano, and Mt. Baker hosted the majority of these deep LFs (also called deep long period events) for all Cascade volcanos between 1980 and 2009 (Nichols et al., 2009). Thus, these deep LF earthquakes provide seismic insights onto the magmatic processes at Mt. Baker. The vast majority of LFs in the PNSN catalog

The PNSN catalog indicates that only 5 earthquakes occurred within 20 km of Mt. Baker since 1980 (e.g., Fig. 2a), and little seismicity was observed during the 1975 period of unrest (Malone, 1977; review in Crider et al., 2011). In contrast, a noteworthy amount of low frequency events (LFs) emminating from Mt. Baker are recorded in the PNSN catalog, characterized as earthquake-like signals with dominant frequencies in the 1-5 Hz band (Fig. 2b-c). The retrospective study by Nichols et al. (2011) investigated LFs deeper than 10 km beneath the Cascades volcanoes between 1980 and 2009, finding that Mt. Baker hosted 31 of 60 total catalogged events for the entire region, and inferred a fluid migration source process for observed deep LFs. Monitoring from 2009 to present (Sept. 2024) resulted in an additional 21 LFs below 10 km at Mt. Baker in the PNSN catalog (Fig. 3).

**FIGURE 2: Example waveforms and spectra from PNSN catalog events accurately located within 20 km of Mt. Baker. a) VT earthquake, b) 30+ km deep LF, c) land-surface LF. <TODO: provide definition for "accurately">**

The glaciers cladding Mt. Baker also produce LFs that share many of the waveform characteristics as deep LFs and likely account for the majority of LFs at Mt. Baker (compare Figs. 2b, 2c, and 3b), as first reported in Malone (1977) and Weaver & Malone (1979). Subsequent studies strengthen this finding on Mt. Baker-and other glaciated volcanoes, using a combination of shallow hypocentral depths, waveform similarity, source clustering, and context of dynamic forcings important to glacier flow to motivate a glacier-source interpretation (Caplan-Auerbach et al., 2009; Thelen et al., 2013; Allstadt & Malone, 2014; and references therein). The similarity of deep and shallow LF waveforms presents a challenge to analysts in distinguishing the source-type of a given LF from it's signal characteristics alone, and by extension, hinders our ability to assess the state and evolution of magmatic processes at glaciated volcanoes (discussions in Crider et al., 2011; Thelen et al., 2013).

Monitoring and discrimination of LF sources at Mt. Baker 
Part of the PNSN automated event detection workflow uses subset groups of seismic stations to associate spatio-temporally clustered event detections into an event trigger (called a subnet trigger), which is then elevated to human review. As such, subnet trigger generation requires a minimum number of reporting stations (typically 4). Mt. Baker had one station (UW.MBW) within 30 km of the edifice, requiring a large enough event at Mt. Baker to be observable out to ~70 km to reach 4 stations. The permanent sub-network within 30 km of Mt. Baker was substantially enhanced in the last 15 years, with additions in . In 2023 UW.MBW2 was added near UW.MBW to provide overlapping coverage in advance of planned decomissioning of UW.MBW. These enhancements correlate with a substantal increase in the number of deep located LFs in the PNSN catalog between 2009 and late 2024 (Fig. 3a). Improved monitoring motivated greater analyst attention, resulting in a substantial increase in the frequency of LF reporting starting c.2022 (Fig. 2b). As such, the occurrence of LFs in the PNSN catalog is likely skewed by changing network sensitivity and deepening understanding of the diversity of potential LF sources at glaciated volcanoes. 

**FIGURE 3: LF occurrence in the PNSN catalog & station density. a) Time-series of event depth, magnitude, and classification. b) Depth histogram of event classes. c) Frequency plot of event classifications**

Using the seismic record at Mt. Baker to monitor magmatic processes over the past half-century has been hindered by the relative absence of VT events, evolving understanding of the diverse source processes that can produce LFs, and sparse network coverage. However, improved monitoring, observatory practice, and analytic methods allow us to ask old questions in a new light:

   1) What are the sources of LFs at Mt. Baker?
   2) What data and methods can we use to reliably differentiate LF source processes?  
   3) Using LFs in continuous waveform archives?  
   4) With an updated catalog, what new insights might we gain about magmatic processes at Mt. Baker?
